# Java
Java is a programming language and a platform. Java is a high level, robust, object-oriented and secure programming language.
Java was developed by Sun Microsystems (which is now the subsidiary of Oracle) in the year 1995. James Gosling is known as the father of Java. 
Before Java, its name was Oak. Since Oak was already a registered company, so James Gosling and his team changed the name from Oak to Java.

## How Java Works?
Java language is first compiled into byte code and then it is interpreted into machine code. Thus, Java is both compiled as well as interpreted language.
* Java Development Kit (JDK): Collection of tools used for developing and running Java programs.
* Java Runtime Environment (JRE): Helps in executing programs developed in Java language.
## Basic Code Snippet for Java

```c
package AboutJava;//group class

public class MainClass {
    public static void main(String[] args) {//Entrypoint into the code/application
        
    }
}
```

## Basics
* `Scanner sc = new Scanner(System.in);`: read value into the variable n from input stream
* `System.out.println();`: print the value to the output stream
* `//`: single line comments
* `/* */`: Multi line comments

### Taking input from the keyboard 
```c
package AboutJava;
import java.util.Scanner;

public class MainClass {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Scanner sc = new Scanner(System.in);
        int a = sc.nextInt();//For integer input
        String b = sc.next(); //For string input
        float = sc.nextFloat(); //For float input
    }
}
```

## Naming Conventions
* For classes, we use Pascal Convention in which first and subsequent characters from a word are capital letters(uppercase)
* For functions and variables, we use camelCase convention. Here, the first character is lowercase and the subsequent characters of next word are uppercase.
* only letters (both uppercase and lowercase letters), digits and underscore(`_`).
* cannot contain white spaces
* First letter should be either a letter or an underscore(`_`).
* Variable type can't be changed
* Case sensitive
* Keywords cannot be used as variable names

## Data types

| Types | Data-type|
|----|----|
|Primitive | int, char, float, double, short, byte, long, boolean |
|Non-Primitive | Classes, Interfaces, Strings, Object, Array, etc. |

## Arrays
An array in Java is a group of like-typed variables referred to by a common name. Arrays in Java work differently than they do in C/C++. An array can contain primitives (int, char, etc.) and object (or non-primitive) references of a class depending on the definition of the array. In the case of primitive data types, the actual values are stored in contiguous memory locations. In the case of class objects, the actual objects are stored in a heap segment. 

### Creating, initializing and accessing an Array
The general form of a one-dimensional array declaration is :
```c
type var-name[];
OR
type[] var-name;
```
* Instantiating an Array in Java
```c
var-name = new type [size];

int[] intArray = new int[20]; // combining both statements in one
```
## Strings
String objects are stored in a special memory area known as string constant pool. To make Java more memory efficient, concept of string literal is used (because no new objects are created if it exists already in string constant pool). 
```c
public class StringExample
{ 
	public static void main(String args[])
	{ 
		String s1=new String("example");//creating java string by new keyword 
		//this statement create two object i.e first object is created in heap //memory area and second object is create in String constant pool. 

		System.out.println(s1);
	}
}

```

| Operator type | Description|
|----|-----|
| Arithmetic Operator|+ , - , * , / , //, % , ** |
| comparision Operator| < , > , <= , >=, != , == |
| Bitwise Operator| &  , | , ^ , >> , << , ~ |
| Logical Operator| and , or , not |
| Assignment Operator| = , += , -= , *= , /= , %=, //=, ** = , &=, ^=, >>== , <<== |

## Keywords
A list of Java keywords or reserved words are given below:

* abstract: Java abstract keyword is used to declare an abstract class. An abstract class can provide the implementation of the interface. It can have abstract and non-abstract methods.
* boolean: Java boolean keyword is used to declare a variable as a boolean type. It can hold True and False values only.
* break: Java break keyword is used to break the loop or switch statement. It breaks the current flow of the program at specified conditions.
* byte: Java byte keyword is used to declare a variable that can hold 8-bit data values.
* case: Java case keyword is used with the switch statements to mark blocks of text.
* catch: Java catch keyword is used to catch the exceptions generated by try statements. It must be used after the try block only.
* char: Java char keyword is used to declare a variable that can hold unsigned 16-bit Unicode characters
* class: Java class keyword is used to declare a class.
* continue: Java continue keyword is used to continue the loop. It continues the current flow of the program and skips the remaining code at the specified condition.
* default: Java default keyword is used to specify the default block of code in a switch statement.
* do: Java do keyword is used in the control statement to declare a loop. It can iterate a part of the program several times.
* double: Java double keyword is used to declare a variable that can hold 64-bit floating-point number.
* else: Java else keyword is used to indicate the alternative branches in an if statement.
* enum: Java enum keyword is used to define a fixed set of constants. Enum constructors are always private or default.
* extends: Java extends keyword is used to indicate that a class is derived from another class or interface.
* final: Java final keyword is used to indicate that a variable holds a constant value. It is used with a variable. It is used to restrict the user from updating the value of the variable.
* finally: Java finally keyword indicates a block of code in a try-catch structure. This block is always executed whether an exception is handled or not.
* float: Java float keyword is used to declare a variable that can hold a 32-bit floating-point number.
* for: Java for keyword is used to start a for loop. It is used to execute a set of instructions/functions repeatedly when some condition becomes true. If the number of iteration is fixed, it is recommended to use for loop.
* if: Java if keyword tests the condition. It executes the if block if the condition is true.
implements: Java implements keyword is used to implement an interface.
* import: Java import keyword makes classes and interfaces available and accessible to the current source code.
* instanceof: Java instanceof keyword is used to test whether the object is an instance of the specified class or implements an interface.
* int: Java int keyword is used to declare a variable that can hold a 32-bit signed integer.
* interface: Java interface keyword is used to declare an interface. It can have only abstract methods.
* long: Java long keyword is used to declare a variable that can hold a 64-bit integer.
* native: Java native keyword is used to specify that a method is implemented in native code using JNI (Java Native Interface).
* new: Java new keyword is used to create new objects.
* null: Java null keyword is used to indicate that a reference does not refer to anything. It removes the garbage value.
* package: Java package keyword is used to declare a Java package that includes the classes.
* private: Java private keyword is an access modifier. It is used to indicate that a method or variable may be accessed only in the class in which it is declared.
* protected: Java protected keyword is an access modifier. It can be accessible within the package and outside the package but through inheritance only. It can't be applied with the class.
* public: Java public keyword is an access modifier. It is used to indicate that an item is accessible anywhere. It has the widest scope among all other modifiers.
* return: Java return keyword is used to return from a method when its execution is complete.
* short: Java short keyword is used to declare a variable that can hold a 16-bit integer.
* static: Java static keyword is used to indicate that a variable or method is a class method. The static keyword in Java is mainly used for memory management.
* strictfp: Java strictfp is used to restrict the floating-point calculations to ensure portability.
* super: Java super keyword is a reference variable that is used to refer to parent class objects. It can be used to invoke the immediate parent class method.
* switch: The Java switch keyword contains a switch statement that executes code based on test value. The switch statement tests the equality of a variable against multiple values.
* synchronized: Java synchronized keyword is used to specify the critical sections or methods in multithreaded code.
* this: Java this keyword can be used to refer the current object in a method or constructor.
* throw: The Java throw keyword is used to explicitly throw an exception. The throw keyword is mainly used to throw custom exceptions. It is followed by an instance.
* throws: The Java throws keyword is used to declare an exception. Checked exceptions can be propagated with throws.
* transient: Java transient keyword is used in serialization. If you define any data member as transient, it will not be serialized.
* try: Java try keyword is used to start a block of code that will be tested for exceptions. The try block must be followed by either catch or finally block.
* void: Java void keyword is used to specify that a method does not have a return value.
* volatile: Java volatile keyword is used to indicate that a variable may change asynchronously.
* while: Java while keyword is used to start a while loop. This loop iterates a part of the program several times. If the number of iteration is not fixed, it is recommended to use the while loop.
